---
layout: post
title: "What are all the different bound options good for?"
---

## Table of contents
{:.no_toc}

1. This text will be replaced by the ToC, excluding the previous header (WOW!)
{:toc}

## Intro

Concuerror has a number of different bound-related options. This post
aims to explain their meaning and use.

## Depth bound

The depth bound (`-d, --depth_bound`) is a limit on how many events
there can be in a single execution of the given test.  As events,
Concuerror considers any kind of operation that can be potentially
interfering with operations in other processes, such as the delivery
of a message, the expiration of a timeout, or writing and reading
values in an ETS table.  If you are interested in what kind of events
in an Erlang program can interfere, read the paper ["The shared-memory
interferences of Erlang/OTP built-ins"](/publications).

Concuerror requires test executions to have finite length, and the
depth limit is a simple way to guarantee that every execution has a
limited number of events.  However, if an execution reaches this limit
Concuerror cannot prove correctness of the test, and will say so (but
you can make it keep exploring executions anyway).

## Interleaving bound

The interleaving bound (`-i, --interleaving_bound`) is a hard limit on
how many interleavings of the given test will be explored.  Concuerror
is currently always deterministic, so, unless the test or other
options are modified, the same interleavings will be explored, in the
same order, so running a test repeatedly will not return different
results.

## Scheduling bound

Exploring all the interleavings of a concurrent program (and therefore
verifying it), even with Concuerror's specialized techniques, can lead
to exploring a number of interleavings that grows exponentially with
the length of the execution.  If one is interested in finding bugs, on
the other hand, it might be fruitful to explore "simpler" schedulings
before trying more elaborate ones.

Concuerror can help achieve that goal by using a scheduling bound. As
explained in the Bounding chapter in ["Effective Techniques for
Stateless Model Checking"](/publications):

>This [goal] can be achieved using bounding techniques, that impose
 constraints on how/when processes can be scheduled by a stateless
 model checking algorithm and force the algorithm to focus the
 exploration on schedulings that satisfy those constraints.  In this
 way, bugs in ‘simpler’ schedulings can be detected faster than when
 using exhaustive exploration.  Schedulings that violate the
 constraints can also be explored, but each exploration begins with a
 budget (also called a bound), which is spent whenever the algorithm
 schedules processes in a way that violates the constraints.  When no
 budget remains, the SMC algorithm can only explore schedulings that
 satisfy the constraints.

### "Simpler" schedulings

When schedule bounding techniques are used, the "simplest" scheduling
is chosen by the combination of scheduling options, currently
`--scheduling` and `--strict_scheduling`.

### Scheduling bound

The `-b, --scheduling_bound` option defines the value of the
scheduling bound.

### Scheduling bound types

The possible options for scheduling bounding are

* `none` (default), if no scheduling bounding should be used

* `delay` (recommended, when using bounding, and selected by default
  if a value is chosen for `--scheduling_bound` and no type is
  specified), which in Concuerror does **not** correspond to the
  technique found in other bibliography, but at a variant which we
  have named "exploration tree bounding" in the same publication. A
  benefit of this technique is that it is compatible with any DPOR
  algorithm and leads to fairly smooth scaling of the explored search
  space with the increase of the bound.

* `bpor`, as described by \[16\] in the same publication, which is
  based on limiting the number of times a process can be preempted.  A
  practical weakness of this technique is that when a process becomes
  blocked *any* other process can be scheduled without consuming
  bounding budget, possibly leading to unpredictable scaling
  behaviours.

* `ubpor`, which is a mostly abandoned experimental variant of `bpor`
  and is not recommended.