---
layout: post
title: "How to optimize Concuerror's search?"
---

## Table of contents
{:.no_toc}

1. This text will be replaced by the ToC
{:toc}

This post contains tips for optimizing Concuerror's search.

## The bound options

Concuerror has a number of different bound-related options.  These can
be used to reduce the search space is different ways.

### Depth bound

The depth bound (`-d, --depth_bound`) is a limit on how many
events<sup><a name="f1">[1](#f1t)</a></sup> there can be in a single
execution of the given test.  Concuerror requires test executions to
have finite length, and the depth limit is a simple way to guarantee
that every execution has a limited number of events.  However, **if an
execution reaches this limit Concuerror cannot prove correctness of
the test** (and it will report so but you can make it keep exploring
executions anyway).

### Interleaving bound

The interleaving bound (`-i, --interleaving_bound`) is a hard limit on
how many interleavings of the given test will be explored.  Concuerror
is currently always deterministic, so, unless the test or other
options are modified, the same interleavings will be explored, in the
same order, and running a test repeatedly will not return different
results.

### Scheduling bound

Exploring all the interleavings of a concurrent program (and therefore
verifying it), even with Concuerror's specialized techniques, can lead
to exploring a number of interleavings that grows exponentially with
the length of the execution.  If one is interested in finding bugs, on
the other hand, it might be fruitful to explore "simpler" schedulings
before trying more elaborate ones.

Concuerror can help achieve that goal by using a scheduling bound. As
explained in the Bounding chapter in ["Effective Techniques for
Stateless Model Checking"](/publications):

>This [goal] can be achieved using bounding techniques, that impose
 constraints on how/when processes can be scheduled by a stateless
 model checking algorithm and force the algorithm to focus the
 exploration on schedulings that satisfy those constraints.  In this
 way, bugs in ‘simpler’ schedulings can be detected faster than when
 using exhaustive exploration.  Schedulings that violate the
 constraints can also be explored, but each exploration begins with a
 budget (also called a bound), which is spent whenever the algorithm
 schedules processes in a way that violates the constraints.  When no
 budget remains, the SMC algorithm can only explore schedulings that
 satisfy the constraints.

#### "Simpler" schedulings

When schedule bounding techniques are used, the "simplest" scheduling
is chosen by the combination of scheduling options, currently
`--scheduling` and `--strict_scheduling`.

#### Scheduling bound

The `-b, --scheduling_bound` option defines the value of the
scheduling bound.

#### Scheduling bound types

The possible options for scheduling bounding are

* `none` (default), if no scheduling bounding should be used

* `delay` (recommended, when using bounding, and selected by default
  if a value is chosen for `--scheduling_bound` and no type is
  specified), which in Concuerror does **not** correspond to the
  technique found in other bibliography, but at a variant which we
  have named "exploration tree bounding" in the same
  publication<sup><a name="f2">[2](#f2t)</a></sup>. A benefit of this
  technique is that it is compatible with any DPOR algorithm and leads
  to fairly smooth scaling of the explored search space with the
  increase of the bound.

* `bpor`, as described by \[16\] in the same publication<sup><a
  name="f3">[3](#f3t)</a></sup>, which is based on limiting the number
  of times a process can be preempted.  A practical weakness of this
  technique is that when a process becomes blocked *any* other process
  can be scheduled without consuming bounding budget, possibly leading
  to unpredictable scaling behaviours.

* `ubpor`, which is a mostly abandoned experimental variant of `bpor`
  and is not recommended.

## Using the bounds and optimizing your tests

This section provides some general guidelines on how to use Concuerror
effectively.

### See why Concuerror is exploring interleavings

Concuerror explores interleavings based on racing operations it
detects.  Using the `log_all` option together with `show_races` (and a
small `interleaving bound`, to just sample the space of the test) can
let you see the racing operations in a test, and can be a useful aid
in simplifying.

### "Shutdown" sequences of OTP behaviours

If you are spawning processes using supervisors or OTP behaviours, it
is often the case that when your main test process finishes a cascade
of shutdowns will be triggered, which may or may not lead to more
races.  If you are not interested in the behaviour of your processes
shutting down, blocking the main test process with a `receive after
infinity -> ok end` (and ignoring the deadlocks with `--ignore-error
deadlock`) might simplify your test.


### Start simple

Two or three processes and relatively simple test scenarios are enough
to trigger most race conditions.  Even a simple "sequential
concatenation" of two complex racing scenarios will lead to a state
space that has the size of the product of the two individual scenarios
(Concuerror is dynamic and cannot know e.g. that the second scenario
always, independently follows the first).

### Use a scheduling bound

Using a scheduling bound can quickly and effectively lead to a better
search for bugs in your tests.  A good way to summarize this is: "if
you suspect a bug is there, a small scheduling bound will find it".

### Read the hints

Concuerror emits hints upon detecting some patterns that may lead to
unexpected explosion of the search space.  Reading and understanding
them is recommended.

## Final note

Concuerror is a fairly expert tool and mastering its use requires
practise.  If you have further questions consider communicating over
the [suggested channels](/contact)!

#### Footnotes
{:.no_toc}

<a name="f1t">[1](#f1)</a>: As events, Concuerror considers any kind
of Erlang built-in operation that can be potentially interfering with
operations in other processes, such as the delivery of a message, the
expiration of a timeout, or writing and reading values in an ETS
table. If you are interested in a snapshot of what kind of operations
in Erlang programs can interfere, read the paper ["The shared-memory
interferences of Erlang/OTP built-ins"](/publications).

<a name="f2t">[2](#f2)</a>: ["Effective Techniques for Stateless Model Checking"](/publications)

<a name="f3t">[3](#f3)</a>: Same as above.